The Project Gutenberg eBook of Earth transit
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Earth transit

Author: Charles L. Fontenay

Illustrator: Richard Kluga

Release date: September 7, 2023 [eBook #71589]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Royal Publications, Inc

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARTH TRANSIT ***





                             Earth Transit

                        By CHARLES L. FONTENAY

                         Illustrated by KLUGA

                  When murder occurs on a spaceship,
               the number of suspects is at an absolute
                 minimum--and Lefler was that minimum!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Infinity September 1957.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The centerdeck chronometer said 1840 hours.

That startled Lefler into full wakefulness. He was forty minutes
overdue in relieving Makki in the control room.

That wasn't like Makki, he thought as he pulled on his coveralls
hastily. Makki was as punctual--and as thorough--as the maze of
machinery whose destiny he guided. He was as cold as that machinery,
too, when others made a mistake. It made him an efficient spaceship
captain and a disliked man.

Lefler shook his head to clear it of dream-haunted memories. He
had awakened from a nightmare in which, somewhere, there was angry
shouting, to find himself floating midway from floor to ceiling of the
centerdeck of the _Marsward IV_. Somehow, his retaining straps had
become unbuckled, letting him float free of his bunk in his sleep.

Not pausing to fold his bunk back against the curving hull, Lefler made
his way briskly up the companionway, through the empty and darkened
astrogation deck and into the control room.

"Makki," he called to the figure reclining in the control chair.
"Makki, I'm due to relieve you. You're forty minutes overtime."

There was no answer. Floating up to the control chair, Lefler recoiled,
bouncing painfully off the automatic pilot.

Makki was dead. Death had robbed his wide eyes of their dark scorn and
smoothed the bitter lines of his heavy face. His coveralls were charred
around the heat-beam burn in his chest.

The heat-gun bumped against Lefler's shoulder and drifted away at an
angle across the gravityless control room. Lefler stared after it in
horror.

Licking dry lips, he punched the communicator button.

"Blue alert!" he croaked into the microphone. "All hands to control
room. Blue alert!"

Anchoring himself to the automatic pilot, he studied Makki's body as
dispassionately as he could. The captain was still strapped in the
cushioned chair. Oddly, he was wearing gloves.

The log-tape was in the recorder beside the control chair. Clipped to
a metal leaf on the stanchion beside the chair was Makki's notepad.
Scrawled on it in the captain's handwriting was the notation: "73rd
day. Earth transit."

"What's up, Lefler?" asked a voice behind him. Lefler turned to face
Taat, the ship's doctor. Taat, a plump, graying man, was wiping his
hands on the white smock he wore.

Lefler moved aside, letting Taat see Makki's body. Taat's eyes widened
momentarily, then narrowed with a professional gleam. He stepped
quickly to Makki's side, made as if to pick up the dead captain's
wrist, then turned back to Lefler with a fatalistic flick of his hands.

"What was it, Lefler?" he asked in a low voice. "A fight?"

"I don't know," said Lefler. "I found him that way."

Taat raised his eyebrows.

"Robwood?" he asked softly.

Robwood's head poked up through the companionway, and he floated into
the control room. There was a streak of grease across the engineer's
thin face.

"Great space!" exclaimed Robwood at once. "What happened to Makki?"

"Obviously, he's been shot," said Lefler in an even voice. "Any idea
who did it, Robwood?"

"Wait a minute," objected Taat mildly. "That sounds like you are
accusing Robwood, Lefler."

"I'm not," said Lefler hastily. "I'm not leaving you out, Taat. But
there are only the three of us. One of you must have killed him."

"Great space, you don't think that I--" began Robwood.

"Just to get the record straight, Lefler," interrupted Taat, "let's put
it this way: one of the three of us must have killed him."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was not only Lefler's duty watch; as astrogator, he became acting
captain as a result of Makki's death. Moving to the side of the dead
Makki, he turned the ship's radio transmitter toward distant Earth and
pressed the sending key.

"_Marsward IV_ to White Sands," he called. "_Marsward IV_ to White
Sands."

It would be several minutes before a reply could reach them.

Taat, on the other side of the control chair, was examining Makki's
corpse. Robwood stood peering over his shoulder.

Lefler waited to see which one would comment first on the fact that
Makki was wearing gloves. Neither appeared to notice it.

But the gloves put a thought into Lefler's own mind. Fingerprints!

He looked around the control room and found the heat-gun, bumping
against the celestial camera. He pushed himself across the room,
pulling a handkerchief from the back pocket of his coveralls as he did
so. He wrapped the heat-gun in the handkerchief, stuck it in a drawer
beneath one of the control panels, locked the drawer and put the key in
his pocket.

The loudspeaker buzzed.

"_Marsward IV_, this is Capetown," said a slightly wavery voice. "We're
relaying you to White Sands. Go ahead, please."

Lefler picked up the mike.

"_Marsward IV_ to White Sands," he said. "This is Lefler, astrogator.
Makki, captain, shot to death under unknown circumstances. I am
assuming command. Instructions, please."

Taat turned away from Makki's body.

"He's been dead about thirty minutes." Taat looked at the control room
chronometer. It said 1906 hours. "I'm going to list the time in the
death certificate as 1830."

"You can tell?" asked Robwood in astonishment.

"By the eyes," said Taat.

"Wait a minute," said Lefler. "It was only 1840 when I started up here.
You mean he'd been dead only ten minutes then? He was already forty
minutes overdue waking me for my duty watch."

"Could be ten or fifteen minutes either way," conceded Taat. "If he was
late, don't forget that we don't know what happened up here."

"One of us does," reminded Lefler grimly.

"Capetown to _Marsward IV_," said the loudspeaker. "Relaying
instructions from White Sands. Lefler's temporary command of ship
confirmed. All personnel will be booked on suspicion of murder and
mutiny on arrival at Marsport. Captain Makki's body will be preserved
and brought down at Marsport. Each crew member will dictate a statement
on the circumstances of Captain Makki's death and an outline of his
past association with Captain Makki, separately, on this beam for relay
to Marsport."

The three looked at each other.

"That's that," said Lefler. "Robwood, if you and Taat will take Makki's
body away and secure it outside the airlock, I'll get the ship's
records up to date."

Taat unbuckled Makki's body from the control chair. It did not change
its slightly bent position as it drifted slowly upward.

"Why do you reckon he's wearing gloves, Lefler?" Taat asked curiously.

"I wondered when one of you fellows was going to say something about
that!" burst out Robwood, a curious break in his voice. "All of us have
been glaring at each other, suspecting each other, when Makki could
have committed suicide!"

"Makki?" retorted Lefler dryly. "I doubt it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Pushing Makki's body down the hatch toward the airlock at the other
side of the personnel sphere would have been an easy task for one man,
but Lefler wanted Taat and Robwood to watch each other. He didn't want
an "accidental" push to send the prime bit of evidence drifting away
into space. When they had disappeared down the hatch with the corpse,
he eased himself into the control chair and played back the log from
the end of Robwood's last shift at 1000 hours.

Makki had recorded the usual observations of the solar, stellar and
planetary positions when he went on duty. There was nothing else on the
tape.

Lefler stared gloomily at the silent log-recorder. It seemed incredible
to him that never again, except on tape, would he hear Makki's harsh,
sardonic voice. The almost inaudible hum of machinery deep in the ship
only emphasized the oppressive stillness of space outside its thin
walls.

With a sigh, he picked up the log-recorder microphone and pulled the
star sextant down to eye level. He would record the bare facts of
Makki's death after the initial position observations.

"_Marsward IV_, bound Marsport from White Sands," he recited in a
monotone. "Earth-time, October 29, 2048, 1931 hours. Lefler reporting
for duty and assuming command as per conversation with White Sands, to
be recorded this date."

He squinted into the sextant.

"Positions: Sun-Mars, 24°28'42". Sun-Earth--"

He broke off. Where was Earth? Then he remembered.

"Damn!" he muttered. "The transit! A murder sure messes up the records
around here."

The Earth transit was an event of considerable importance to an
astrogator on a hop between Earth and Mars. Marsbound it began on
the 73rd day out, Earthbound on the 187th day. Timing it, spaceship
observers not only checked the accuracy of the ship's orbit, but also
contributed data to the mass of knowledge available on the movements of
Earth and Mars.

Lefler found the black disc of Earth in the smoked glass that
automatically fell across the sextant lens when it swept by the sun. He
checked the angle between the black spot and the leading edge of the
solar disc.

"Earth transit already under way," he said into the mike. "Angle with
leading edge, two minutes, forty seconds...."

He went around the sky, recording planetary and key stellar positions.
He had just finished and switched the tape of his conversation with
Earth to record in the log when Taat and Robwood returned.

"Makki's body will keep out there as well as in a refrigerator,"
said Taat with evident satisfaction. "Robwood tied the airlock into
the alarm system so nobody can go out and cut the body free without
arousing the others."

"You're both mighty cooperative for one of you to be a murderer,"
remarked Lefler.

"Maybe neither of us is," said Robwood. "As far as I'm concerned, you
may be the man."

"Or, as Robwood suggested earlier, Makki may have shot himself," added
Taat.

"Robwood, you and I are going to have to do twelve-hour watches from
here to Mars, since Taat doesn't know how to operate the controls,"
said Lefler. "I'll stay on duty till 0600, and you'd better get some
sleep after you've radioed your statement to White Sands."

"Okay," said Robwood. "But are we still going to record star positions
in the log every eight hours, or just every twelve hours now?"

"Twelve, I think. But the Earth transit's on right now, and until Terra
swings across that half a degree of the sun's face, we'd better take
readings on that every four hours, anyhow."

"Well, that's just for a little more than two days," said Robwood.
"Look, Lefler, I'm overdue on my sleeping time anyway, so how about
letting me make my statement on ... on Makki first?"

"Blast away," said Lefler. "The mike's yours. We'll leave the control
room so you'll feel freer to talk."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lefler munched thoughtfully on a hot sandwich. Across the control room,
in the astrogator's chair, Taat sucked at a bulb of coffee.

"Nice of you to fix up this lunch, Taat," said Lefler. "I'm not tied
strictly to the control room during my watch, you know. But little
things like this relax the tension."

"Yes, it's a peculiar situation, Lefler," said Taat in a tone that
indicated he had been thinking about it. "Psychologically, I mean. Now
if there were only the two of us, and Makki drifting out there dead,
both of us would know who shot him. With three of us, it's different.

"You and I are sitting here talking as though neither of us killed
Makki. Maybe you hadn't thought of it, but that means that tacitly, for
now, we're assuming Robwood killed him. But, for all I know, you did.
And, if you didn't, for all you know, I did."

"Until we find out, I have to suspect you both," said Lefler flatly.

"I could say the same thing," murmured Taat. "But one of us may be
lying."

"Of course, Makki could have shot himself, as Robwood suggested," said
Lefler. "If he had relaxed his grip on the heat-gun after pressing the
trigger, it would have drifted up away from him. There were the gloves,
you know."

"Why wouldn't Makki want his fingerprints on the gun if he were
committing suicide?" objected Taat. "I'll concede that Makki had strong
sadistic tendencies, but my guess is that the murderer put those gloves
on him just to raise the possibility of suicide."

Taat finished his coffee and left the control room. Lefler washed
down the last bit of his sandwich with his own coffee and called
White Sands on the radio. When he received an acknowledgment after the
inevitable delay, he began to dictate his statement.

Lefler told of waking from his sleep period and finding himself forty
minutes late for his watch. He described his discovery of Makki's
body, what followed, and everything he could remember of what Taat and
Robwood had said when they came to the control room.

"Makki was thoroughly detested by every member of the crew," Lefler
related. "He did not fraternize and no one wanted to fraternize with
him, because he was treacherous. In the midst of an apparently friendly
conversation, he would suddenly unveil his authority with some biting
and belittling remark. He never let anyone forget he was captain.

"Robwood was afraid of him and hated him intensely. Robwood had told
me privately he intended to ask for a transfer to another ship after
this hop to Mars. Makki held Robwood in considerable scorn because
Robwood is a timid man, and a slow thinker outside his own field of
engineering. Makki made no effort to conceal that scorn.

"Taat was as contemptuous of Makki as Makki was of Robwood. Makki was
ruthless with any open attempt to question his judgment, but Taat
could do it with a raised eyebrow, his tone of voice or a well-chosen
phrase. Makki sensed this, and alternated between treating Taat as more
of an equal than either Robwood or me and 'riding' Taat harder than
anyone else.

"Robwood and Taat have been aboard with us for the last five hops,
but I've been with Makki since both of us graduated from the Space
Academy. We were boys together, but I have never liked Makki. He always
had too little respect for human dignity. He was a good space captain
because he was a genius with such impersonal things as machinery and
astrogation, and I have never known him to slip up on a record or let a
ship get a single second off course. But mankind is better off without
him."

Lefler signed off and laid the microphone down. He realized suddenly
that he was perspiring and his hands were trembling. The statement had
been a major emotional strain.

Unstrapping himself from the control chair, he floated down past the
astrogation deck and looked in on the centerdeck. Both Taat and Robwood
were strapped to their bunks, apparently asleep.

Satisfied, Lefler returned to the control room. He wanted to listen,
without embarrassing interruptions, to Taat's and Robwood's statements
as he transferred them from the radio recording tape to the ship's log.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tapes rolled on the two connected machines, the log tape slowly,
the radio tape at a faster clip. A loudspeaker was plugged into the
radio-tape machine. Lefler kept it turned low, though the centerdeck
was two decks down.

"I woke Makki at 0930 hours." It was Robwood's low voice on the tape.
"He relieved me right at 1000 hours. I went down to the centerdeck and
had a late lunch. Lefler strapped himself in for his sleeping period
while I was eating. Taat ate lunch with me, and then we played cards
for about an hour. We do that almost every day when Taat's sleeping
periods are on the same schedule as mine. He changes his, because he's
a psychologist and wants to watch all the crew members.

"I check the rocket engines and the fuel tanks every twenty-five days.
When the Earth transit is coming up, I always do it two days ahead of
time in case there are any corrections to be made in the ship's orbit.
I got into a spacesuit and spent the rest of my free period outside
the personnel sphere doing that. I took a break for supper, I'd say
about 1600 hours, and went back to my inspection. Taat ate with me and
Lefler was asleep. Makki didn't eat with us. He did sometimes, but not
often. He usually wanted to eat alone. With the Earth transit about
due, I figured he'd already eaten and gone back to the control room.

"I was late for my sleeping period, but I wanted to finish my
inspection. I had just gotten back through the airlock and was taking
my spacesuit off when I heard Lefler call from the control room. He and
Taat were both there when I got there.

"I didn't like Makki, but neither did Taat and Lefler. I suppose
it'll come out, so I might as well tell about it. Makki broke up my
engagement with a girl back on Earth several years ago. I wasn't going
to sign on for the Mars hop because I was going to get married. Makki
couldn't find an engineer to replace me, and he smooth-talked her out
of it. He told me about it a long time afterward and laughed at me. I
haven't ever seen her again.

"Lefler and Taat are both decent fellows and I don't think either one
of them killed Makki. I think he shot himself. He ought to have!"

Robwood's final words were spoken in an outburst of concentrated
bitterness. Lefler stared thoughtfully at the unwinding tapes as he
waited for Taat's report to tune in. He hadn't known that about
Robwood's fiancée, but it was the sort of thing Makki wouldn't hesitate
to do.

"The last time I saw Makki," came Taat's calm, controlled voice from
the loudspeaker, "was 1615 hours. He had just finished lunch and was
going back to the control room when I came onto the centerdeck from
the storage deck below. Robwood came up from below a couple of minutes
later and we ate supper together.

"Robwood and I usually play a round of cards after supper when we're
on the same schedule, but he was busy and I was in the middle of an
experiment in the lab I have set up on the storage deck. We went down
to the storage deck together. He went on below to the airlock and I
started the moving picture camera again on my experiment.

"I didn't go up again until Lefler sounded the alarm. He was alone with
Makki in the control room when I got there, and Makki was dead.

"I must admit it is my personal feeling that whichever of my colleagues
killed Makki is a benefactor to the human race, and I hope he escapes
punishment. I did not know Makki before Robwood and I signed up
together on the _Marsward IV_ five voyages ago. I made the mistake of
entering into a business transaction with him on our first Mars trip.
He needed my capital and we became partners in purchasing a block
of stock in a private dome enterprise. He accused me several times
afterward of cheating him, but he handled the dividends and I think he
was cheating me.

"As a psychologist, I would say that Lefler is more likely to have
killed Makki coldly and deliberately, but Robwood is more likely to
have killed him in the heat of an argument."

Taat's voice stopped. Lefler turned off the machines and disconnected
them.

An argument. He had heard shouting in his dreams. Was that what had
awakened him?

He tried to bring the dream into focus. It barely eluded him. All he
could remember was that it was something about Makki.

       *       *       *       *       *

Both Taat and Robwood were up by 0400 hours. They brought their
breakfasts to the control room, along with coffee for Lefler.

It was a pleasant meal for the three of them. No one really seemed to
care that one of the others was a murderer, Lefler thought. They talked
and acted more like companions in crime--or like the murderer was none
of them, but someone lurking somewhere else in the ship.

He wished he did not feel impelled to find out, if he could, who killed
Makki. But he knew that Taat would be trying to find out, too--if
Taat hadn't done it--because Taat was a psychologist and would look
at it as a scientific problem. Robwood was the only one who might be
temperamentally inclined to let the solution wait until they reached
Mars.

When Robwood took over duty watch at 0600 hours, Lefler found Taat
listening to a tape on criminal psychology on the centerdeck.

"Taat, didn't I hear you say you were working on some sort of an
experiment on the storage deck while Makki was on watch yesterday?"
asked Lefler.

Taat switched off the player.

"That's what I was doing," he said carefully, "but I don't remember
saying anything about it."

"I listened to the reports you and Robwood made while I was recording
them in the log," admitted Lefler. "I was interested in your estimate
of Robwood's and my comparative abilities to commit murder."

Taat removed his spectacles, polished them and put them in his breast
pocket before answering.

"I'm not surprised that you listened, Lefler--whether you're guilty
or innocent," said Taat. "You probably noted that I mentioned I was
recording my experiments on film. If you'll go below with me, I'd like
for you to see that film."

Together, they pulled themselves down to the storage deck. Over near
the main electrical switchboard, Robwood had torn out three empty
spacesuit lockers and built a compact laboratory for Taat. A dozen
white mice and some hamsters floated in cages attached to the wall.

For Taat's convenience, Robwood had moved the storage deck chronometer
from the other side of the deck to the lab. It read 0607.

Taat unrolled a screen against one of the spacesuit lockers, attached
the film roll to the projector, darkened the deck and began the showing.

The film began on Taat's face, blurred and enormously enlarged, as he
switched on the camera. Taat stepped backward until he was in focus,
and picked up the microphone that tied into the sound track.

"This is an experiment with white mice in a maze under conditions of
zero gravity," said the Taat on the screen. Stepping aside, he waved a
hand at a wire contraption on a table. "I have here a three-dimensional
maze. The chronometer is visible above it, so we can check the reaction
time."

Lefler noted the chronometer reading. It was 1500. In the "day" square
just below its center was the figure 73.

Lefler checked the chronometer in the picture as the film ran on. There
was an announced break between 1612 and 1654. Other than that, it ran
continuously to 1851, when his own voice sounded faintly, calling,
"Blue alert! All hands to control room. Blue alert!" At that, Taat's
startled face loomed up again before the lens and the film stopped
abruptly.

Throughout the approximately three hours, Taat was always in the
camera's view, running his mice through the maze and explaining his
methods.

"What was that forty-minute break, Taat?" asked Lefler when Taat
switched the lights on once again.

"Supper," said Taat. "Robwood and I ate together, and came back down
from the centerdeck together. I saw Makki leave the centerdeck when I
went up, but Robwood got there a minute or two later and I don't think
he saw Makki."

"You seem to have established a pretty good alibi," said Lefler slowly.
"How about Robwood?"

"Lefler, for your sake, I hate to say this. The only time Robwood was
above the storage deck from the time I started this film was when we
had supper together. I'd have seen him if he'd passed through, and
the only way he could have gotten into the control room would have been
through one of the ports."

"He couldn't, without breaking it and setting off an alarm," said
Lefler. "Are you trying to tell me you think I killed Makki, Taat?"

"I was here," said Taat, waving his hand at the projector. "I was
between Robwood and the control room all the time. You're the only one
who could have gotten there without my seeing you, Lefler, and I found
you alone with him fifteen minutes after he died."

"You're sure about that fifteen minutes?"

"Within a pretty narrow range. The dilation of the pupils is an
accurate gauge. I don't say you killed him, Lefler. I hope they rule it
was suicide."

Silently, Lefler went back to the centerdeck, undressed and strapped
himself into his bunk. He found it hard to get to sleep. Something was
nagging at the back of his mind. He hoped he wouldn't dream of Makki
again.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Lefler assumed his duty watch at 1800, he asked Robwood to stay in
the control room with him for a talk. Robwood strapped himself in the
astrogator's chair and waited while Lefler made the position readings.
Then Lefler swung his chair around to face Robwood.

"I want to check some things with you, Robwood," he said. "I've
listened to your report and Taat's and I've seen a film of Taat's that
seems to give you both an alibi. After Makki relieved you and you ate
lunch, was suppertime the only time you came back into the personnel
sphere?"

"That's right," said Robwood. "Taat and I played cards a while after
lunch, but I think you were awake then."

"How long did your supper period last?"

"Oh, half an hour. Maybe a little longer. You were asleep and snoring."

Lefler shook his head savagely.

"Robwood, I'm afraid you're going to have to take over the ship. I want
you to put me in irons and turn me over for Makki's murder when we get
to Marsport."

Robwood started so violently he almost broke his retaining straps. He
stared at Lefler for a full thirty seconds before he found his voice.

"You're not serious!" he exclaimed. There was a pleading note to his
tone. "Lefler, you didn't shoot him, did you?"

"I must have, Robwood. But not consciously. I've been able at last to
remember a nightmare I had just before I found Makki's body.

"Makki and I were boys together, and he was just as mean and evil then
as he was when he grew up. I was dreaming about the time Makki smashed
my toy electric train and laughed about it. I tried to kill him then. I
beat him with the semaphore and cut his face all up before he knocked
me down and kicked me half senseless. I lived through that experience
again in my dream.

"My bunk straps were loose when I woke up. I must have acted that dream
out in a semi-conscious state. I must have gone up to the control room,
tackled Makki and finally shot him."

"That's the silliest thing I ever heard of," retorted Robwood.

"It must be true, Robwood. Neither you nor Taat could have killed him,
and Taat's got the film to prove it."

Robwood unstrapped himself and pushed himself to the companionway with
some determination.

"Well, I'm not going to take over the ship and I'm not going to put
you in irons," he said spiritedly. "I couldn't handle the ship on a
twenty-four-hour basis for the next hundred and eighty-six days, and
I'd rather think Makki killed himself."

He paused at the top of the companionway.

"Don't forget," he said. "The Earth transit ought to be at midpoint in
a couple of hours."

Then he disappeared below.

Lefler took the magnetized pencil from the memorandum pad and wrote a
reminder: "E.T. midpoint. Should check 28:16:54."

Lefler leaned back gloomily in the control chair. Had he killed Makki?
It seemed the only way it could have happened, unless Makki had,
indeed, committed suicide. And he just didn't think Makki had.

The chronometer said 1839. Exactly twenty-four hours ago, he had
awakened from a nightmare and had come up to find Makki dead in this
same chair. It seemed a century.

He glanced idly back at the memorandum pad. 28:15:64. He'd have to make
an entry in the log in a little under two hours. How could he check
accurately when the time of entry into transit was estimated?

Twenty-four plus two. Twenty-six.

He sat bolt upright, straining at his straps. He snapped down the
communicator button.

"Robwood, come back up here!" he bellowed.

Unbuckling himself hastily, Lefler headed across the room toward the
heat-gun rack.

       *       *       *       *       *

Taat was playing solitaire, waiting patiently for Robwood, when Lefler
and Robwood came down to the centerdeck together.

Lefler pointed a heat-gun at Taat.

"Go below and get the irons, Robwood," he said. "Taat, I'm sorry, but
I'm arresting you for the murder of Makki."

Taat raised an eyebrow and continued shuffling cards.

"I don't think you want to do anything like that, Robwood," he said
mildly. "Do you?"

Robwood hesitated and cast an anxious glance at him, but turned and
headed for the companionway to the storage deck.

"You've convinced him, have you, Lefler?" said Taat. "I didn't believe
you were guilty, but this makes me think you are."

Lefler said nothing, but held the gun steadily on Taat. Taat appeared
relaxed, but Lefler sensed a tension in him.

"What makes you think I did it, Lefler?" sparred Taat. The light
glinted from his spectacles as he turned his eyes from Lefler's face to
watch the shuffling cards.

"Two things," said Lefler. "If I'd killed him in a half-asleep daze, I
wouldn't have put gloves on him to make it look like suicide. Second,
your film started at 1500--a strangely precise hour--and Makki was
killed before then."

"The first point is good psychology," conceded Taat. "Since Robwood
couldn't have done it, I'll admit it looks like suicide. But your
second point doesn't hold water. Medical examination is accurate almost
to a fine point on the time of death so soon afterward."

"Medical evidence may not lie, but the examiner can, Taat," said Lefler.

The clank of the chains resounded up the companionway. Robwood was
coming back. The spring in Taat uncoiled.

With a single sweep, he hurled the deck of cards at Lefler's head and
surged upward. Lefler lost his balance and fell sidewise as he dodged
the improvised missile. But even as he lost his equilibrium, he pressed
the trigger of the heat-gun and brought it downward in a fast chop.

The straps that held Taat to his chair were his doom. The searing beam
swept across them, freeing him but at the same time blasting a six-inch
swath across his stomach. Taat screamed hoarsely as the beam swung past
him and burned along the floor of the centerdeck.

Lefler regained his balance and floated to Taat's side, pushing aside
the cards that drifted in a swirling cloud about the room. Robwood
appeared from below, the manacles in his hands.

"Your third point wins the day," gasped Taat, his hands writhing over
his mangled abdomen. "I won't last long, but if you'll get me to the
control room I'll radio a confession that'll clear you and Robwood
completely."

"Help me get him to a bunk, Robwood," ordered Lefler, grasping Taat by
the arms. "Taat, you'll have to tell us what to do for you."

"No use," groaned Taat. He managed a ghastly smile. "I unbuckled your
bunk straps to throw you off course, Lefler, but I don't want you to
think I was trying to blame it on you. I was trying to make it look
like Makki killed himself."

"But why, Taat?"

"It wasn't just that Makki cheated me," replied Taat with some
difficulty. "I'd saved several thousand dollars to build a little
clinic in Mars City--something I've dreamed of all my life. That's why
I let Makki talk me into investing--I needed just a little more. But
the business was almost worthless. He stole most of my money. I was
arguing with him about it in the control room, when he drew the gun and
threatened to kill me. He was strapped down. I wrestled with him, and
he was killed in the scuffle. That's it."

They maneuvered Taat into a bunk and tried to arrange the straps to
avoid the gaping wound in his stomach. Taat raised his hand weakly and
removed his spectacles. He blinked up at Lefler.

"I didn't think you knew enough about medicine to tell how long a man
had been dead," he said.

"I don't," said Lefler. "But you set the time of Makki's death at 1830
hours. You said you could tell.

"The Earth transit started at 1612, Taat. I've known Makki all my life.
If he'd been alive then, he'd have recorded it in the log. And he
didn't.

"I just figured the only man who had any reason to lie deliberately
about the time of Makki's death was the man who shot him."

Lefler looked at the centerdeck chronometer. It was 2025.

"Do what you can for him, then bring him up to the radio, Robwood," he
said. "I've got to get up to the control room and record the midpoint
of the Earth transit."




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EARTH TRANSIT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


