The Project Gutenberg eBook of For service rendered
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: For service rendered

Author: Jesse F. Bone

Illustrator: Lee Brown Coye

Release date: December 15, 2023 [eBook #72422]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR SERVICE RENDERED ***





                         FOR SERVICE RENDERED

                             By J. F. BONE

                          Illustrated by COYE

             _Are you dissatisfied with the programs that
           come through your television set? Don't complain
           too much. Look what came through Miss Twilley's!_

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Amazing Stories April 1963.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Television made Miss Enid Twilley's life endurable by providing the
romance which life had withheld. So when the picture tube in her
old-fashioned set blew out, it was a major crisis. But Ed Jacklin's
phone didn't ring. The spare twenty-eight inch tube in Jacklin's T.V.
shop remained undisturbed on the shelf. And the drawn shades of Miss
Twilley's living room gave no hint of what was happening behind them.
The town of Ellenburg went its suburban way unaware of the crisis in
its residential district.

Which was probably just as well.

Frozen with terror, Miss Twilley sat in spastic rigidity, her horrified
eyes riveted on the thing in front of her. One moment she had been
suffering emphatic pangs of unrequited love with a bosomy T.V. blonde,
the next she was staring into a rectangular hole of Cimmerian blackness
that writhed, twisted and disgorged a shape that made her tongue cleave
to the roof of her mouth and her throat constrict against the scream
that fought for release.

It wasn't a large shape but it was enormously impressive despite the
lime green shorts and cloak that partially covered it. It was obviously
reptilian. The red skin with its faint reticulated pattern of ancestral
scales, the horns, the lidless eyes, the tapering flexible tail, the
sinuous grace and Mephistophelean face were enough to identify it
beyond doubt.

Her television set had disgorged the devil!

Silence draped the room in smothering folds as Miss Twilley's frozen
eyeballs were caught and held for a moment by the devil's limpid green
eyes whose depths swirled for an instant with uncontrolled surprise.
The devil looked around the room, at the closed drapes, the dim lights,
the shabby furniture and the plate of cookies and the teapot on the
tray beside Miss Twilley's chair. He shook his head.

"No pentacle, no candles or incense, no altar, no sacrifice. Not even
a crystal ball," he murmured in an impeccable Savile Row accent. "My
dear young woman--just _how_ in Eblis' name did you do it? There isn't
a single sixth order focus in this room."

"Do what?" Miss Twilley managed to croak.

"Construct a gateway," the devil said impatiently. "A bridge between
your world and mine."

"I didn't," Miss Twilley said. "You came crawling out of the picture
tube of my T.V. set--or what was the picture tube," she amended as her
eyes strayed to the rectangle of darkness.

The devil turned and eyed the T.V. curiously, giving Miss Twilley an
excellent view of his tail which protruded through a slit in his cloak.
She eyed it with apprehension and distaste.

"Ah--I see," the devil murmured, "a third order electronic communicator
transformed to a sixth order generator by an accidental short circuit.
Most interesting. The statistical chances of this happening are about
1.75 to the 25th power, give or take a couple of hundred thousand. You
are an extremely fortunate human."

"That's not what I would call it," Miss Twilley said.

       *       *       *       *       *

The devil smiled, an act that made him look oddly like Krishna Menon.
"You _are_ disturbed," he said, "but you really needn't keep projecting
such raw fear. I have no intention of harming you. Quite the contrary
in fact."

Miss Twilley wasn't reassured. Devils with British accents were
probably untrustworthy. "Why don't you go back to hell where you came
from?" she asked pettishly.

"I wish," the devil said with a shade of annoyance in his beautifully
modulated voice, "that you would stop using those terminal 'l's', I'm a
Devi, not a devil--and my homeworld is Hel, not hell. One 'l', not two.
I'm a species, not a spirit."

"It makes no difference," Miss Twilley said. "Either way you're
disconcerting, particularly when you come slithering out of my T.V.
set."

"It might give your television industry a bad name," the Devi agreed.
"But there are many of your race who claim the device is an invention
of mine."

"I don't enjoy being frightened," Miss Twilley said coldly. She was
rapidly recovering her normal self-possession. "And I would have felt
much better if you had stayed where you belonged and minded your own
business," she finished.

"But my dear young lady," the Devi protested. "I never dreamed that
I would frighten you, and besides you _are_ my business." He smiled
gently at the suddenly re-frozen Miss Twilley.

I must be dreaming, Miss Twilley thought wildly. This has to be a
nightmare. After all, this is the Twentieth Century and there are no
such things as devils.

"Of course there aren't," the Devi said.

"I only hope I wake up before I go stark raving mad!" Miss Twilley
murmured. "Now he's answering before I say anything."

"You're not asleep," he said unreassuringly. "I merely read your mind."
He grimaced distastefully. "And what a mass of fears, inhibitions,
repressions, conventions and attitudes it is! Ugh! It's a good thing
for your race that minds like yours are not in the majority. It would
be disastrous. Or do you realize you're teetering on the verge of
paranoia. You are badly in need of adjustment."

"I'm not! You're lying! You're the Father of Lies!" she snapped.

"And liars (he made it sound like "lawyers") so I'm told. Nevertheless
I'm telling you the truth. I don't care to be confused with some
anthropomorphic figment of your superstitious imagination. I'm as real
as you are. I have a name--Lyf--just as yours is Enid Twilley. I'm
the mardak of Gnoth, an important entity in my enclave. And I have
no intention of seizing you and carrying you off to Hel. The Council
would take an extremely dim view of such an action. Passing a human
permanently across the hyperspatial gap that separates our worlds is a
crime--unless consent in writing is obtained prior to such passage."

[Illustration: "_Unless we have consent in writing, passing a human
permanently across the hyperspatial gap that separates our worlds is a
crime._"]

"I'll bet!"

"Are you calling me a liar?" Lyf asked softly.

"That's the general idea."

"There's a limit to human insolence," Lyf said icily. "No wonder some
of my colleagues occasionally incinerate members of your race."

Miss Twilley choked back the crudity that fluttered on her lips.

"That's better," Lyf said approvingly. "You really should practice self
control. It's good for you. And you shouldn't make assumptions based
upon incomplete data. Your books that deal with my race are notoriously
one-sided. I came through that gateway because you needed my help.
And yet you'd chase me off without really knowing whether you want my
services or not."

"I don't want any part of you," Miss Twilley said sincerely. "I don't
need a thing you can give me. I'm healthy, fairly well-off and"--she
was about to say "happy" but changed it quickly to "satisfied with
things as they are." It wasn't _quite_ a lie.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lyf looked at her critically. "Permit me to disagree," he said
smoothly. "But you are wrong on every count. You are neither satisfied,
wealthy nor happy. Frankly, Miss Twilley, you could use a great deal of
help. In fact, you need it desperately."

"I am thirty-eight years old," Miss Twilley said. "That's old enough to
recognize a high pressure sales pitch. And you needn't be so insulting
about my appearance. After all, I don't have my makeup on."

Lyf flinched. "I almost hate to do this," he murmured. "But you have
doubted my honesty. Perhaps it is compensation to hide a feeling of
inferiority. Primitive egos are notorious for such acts. But the truth
is probably less harmful than permitting you to lie to yourself."

Miss Twilley jumped angrily to her feet. "How dare you call me a liar!"
she snapped. She towered over the Devi, her tall bony body a knobby
statue of wrath.

Lyf's eyes locked with hers. "Sit down," he said coldly.

And to her surprised consternation, she did. A physical force seemed
to flow from him and force her back into the chair. She sat rigidly,
seething with a mixture of fear and indignation as Lyf picked up his
discourse where he had dropped it.

"You are not satisfied," he said quietly "because you are
undernourished, ungainly, and ugly. You would like to be attractive.
You wish to be admired. You long to be loved. Yet you are not."

"That's enough!" Miss Twilley snapped. "Neither man nor Devi has the
right to insult me in my own house."

"I am not insulting you," Lyf said patiently. "I am telling you the
truth. Now as for this business of being well-off, which I infer,
means moderately wealthy--you are not. There was a small inheritance
from your father, but through mismanagement and inept investments it
is today less than fifteen thousand dollars, although it was fifty
thousand when you received it a few years ago."

"You _are_ the devil!" she gasped.

"I told you I could read your mind. I'm a telepath."

"I don't believe you. You found out somehow."

"You're not thinking," he said. "How could I? Now, as for your
health, you will be dead in six months without my help. You have
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas which has already begun to metastasize.
You cannot possibly survive with the present state of medicine your
race possesses. Of course, your doctors do have ingenious ways of
alleviating the pain," he added comfortingly, "like chordotomy and
neurectomy."

Miss Twilley didn't recognize the last two words, but they sounded
unpleasant. She _had_ been worried about her health, but to hear this
quiet-voiced death sentence paralyzed her with a cold crawling terror.
"It's not true!" she gasped. Yet she knew it was.

"I could make a fortune as a diagnostician for your sham--your
doctors," Lyf said. "It's as true as the fact that I'm a Devi from Hel.
Actually, my dear Miss Twilley, I had no intention of coming here even
though your gateway appeared in my library. But I was intrigued enough
to scan through it. And when I saw you at the other end, frightened,
diseased, and friendless, I could not help feeling pity for you. You
needed my help badly." He sighed. "Empathy is a Devi's weak point.
Naturally I couldn't refuse your appeal." He shrugged. "At least I
have offered to help, and my conscience is clear if you refuse." He
wrapped his cloak around him with a movement of his lithe body that was
symbolic. The case had been stated. His part was done.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I have nothing more to say," Lyf added. "If you do not wish me to stay
I shall leave." He turned toward the T.V. set. "After I have vanished,"
he said over his shoulder "you may turn the set off. The gateway will
disappear." He shrugged. "Next time I'll look for a sabbat or some
other normal focal point before I enter a gateway. This has been
thoroughly unsatisfying."

"Wait!" Miss Twilley gasped.

He paused. "Have you changed your mind?"

"Maybe."

"For a human female, that's quite a concession," he said, "but I'm a
Devi. I need a more devinate--er--definite answer."

"Would you give me twenty-four hours?" Miss Twilley said.

"So you can check my diagnosis?"

She nodded.

Lyf shrugged. "Why not. If your T.V. holds out that long, I'll give
you that much time. Longer if necessary. You can't really be blamed
for being a product of your culture--and your culture has rejected the
Snake. It would be easier if you were a Taoist or a Yezidee."

"But I'm not," Miss Twilley said miserably. "And I can't help thinking
of you as the Enemy."

"We Devi get blamed for a lot of things," Lyf admitted, "and taken
collectively there's some truth in them. We gave you basic knowledge of
a number of things such as medicine, writing, law, and the scientific
method. But we can't be blamed for the uses to which you have put them."

"Are you sure I have cancer?" she interrupted.

"Of the pancreas," he said.

"And you can cure it?"

"Easily. Anyone with a knowledge of fifth order techniques can
manipulate cellular structures. There's very little I can't do, and
with proper equipment about the only thing that can't be defeated
is death. You've heard, I suppose, of tumors that have disappeared
spontaneously." Miss Twilley nodded.

"Most of them are Devian work. Desperate humans sometimes use good
sense, find a medium and generate a sixth order focus. And occasionally
one of us will hear and come."

"And the others?"

"I don't know," Lyf said. "I could guess that some of you can crudely
manipulate fifth order forces, but that would only be a guess." He
spread his hands in a gesture of incomprehension incongruously Gallic.
"I don't know why I'm taking all this trouble with you, but I will make
a concession to your conditioning. See your doctors. And then, if you
want my help, call through the gateway. I'll probably hear you, but if
I don't, keep calling."

The darkness where the picture tube had been writhed and swirled as he
dove into it and vanished.

"Whew!" Miss Twilley said shakily. "_That_ was an _experience_!"

She walked unsteadily toward the T.V. set. "I'd better turn this off
just in case he gets an idea of coming back. Trust a _devil_! Hardly!"
Her hand touched the switch and hesitated. "But perhaps he was telling
the truth," she murmured doubtfully. "Maybe I'd better leave it on."
She smiled wryly. "Anyway--it's insurance."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Miss Twilley," the doctor said slowly, "can you take a shock?"

"I've done it before. What's the matter? Don't tell me that I have an
adenocarcinoma of the pancreas that'll kill me in six months."

The doctor eyed her with startled surprise. "We haven't pinpointed
the primary site, but the tests are positive. You do have an
adenocarcinoma, and it has involved so many organs that we cannot
operate. You have about six months left to live."

"My God!" Miss Twilley gasped. "He was telling the truth!"

"Who was telling--" the doctor began. But he was talking to empty air.
Miss Twilley had run from the office. The doctor sighed and shrugged.
Probably he shouldn't have told her. One never can tell how these
things will work out. She had the diagnosis right and she looked like a
pretty hard customer. But she certainly didn't act like one.

       *       *       *       *       *

Panting with fear, Enid Twilley unlocked the door of her house and
dashed into the living room. Thank G--, thank goodness! she thought
with relief. The set was still working. The black tunnel was still
there.

"Help!" she screamed. "Lyf! Please! come back!"

The blackness writhed and the Devi appeared. He was wearing an orange
and purple striped outfit this time. Miss Twilley shuddered.

"Well?" Lyf asked.

"You were right," she said faintly. "The doctor says it's cancer. Will
you cure me?"

"For a price," Lyf said.

"But you said--"

"I said nothing except that I felt sorry for you and that I could cure
you. Even your own doctors charge a fee."

"There had to be a catch in it," Miss Twilley said bitterly.

"It will be a fair price. It won't be excessive."

"My soul?" Miss Twilley whispered.

"Your soul? Ha! Just what would I do with your soul? It would be no use
to me--assuming that you have one. No--I don't want your soul."

"Then what do you want?"

"Your body."

"So _that's_ it!" Miss Twilley blushed a bright scarlet.

"Hmm--with that color you're not bad looking." Lyf said.

"Would you want my body right away?"

"Of course not. That wouldn't be a fair contract. You should have use
of it for a reasonable time on your homeworld. Say about ten years.
After that it becomes mine."

"How long?"

"For the rest of your life."

"That doesn't seem quite fair. I'm thirty-eight now. Ten years from now
I'll be forty-eight. I'll live perhaps to eighty. That gives you over
thirty years."

"It gives you them, too," Lyf said.

"But your world is alien."

"Not entirely. There are quite a few humans on Hel. You'd have plenty
of company."

"I can imagine," she said drily.

Lyf flinched. "I've told you I do not like those anthropomorphic
references to my race."

"So you say. But I don't trust you even though you've told me the truth
about my body. I won't sell my soul."

"I'll put a disclaimer in writing if that will satisfy you," Lyf said
wearily. "I'm tired of haggling."

"But will you obey it."

"With us Devi, a contract is sacred. Even your mythology tells you that
much."

She nodded. "Of course, I'd want a few more things than health," she
said. "I'd want to enjoy these ten years on earth."

"That is understandable. I'll consider any reasonable request."

"Beauty?"

"As you humans understand it. Sarcoplasty isn't too difficult."

"Wealth?"

"That's more difficult. And more expensive. But I could perhaps give
you a one month chronograph survey. In that time you could probably
arrange to become rich enough to be independent. But I can't guarantee
unlimited funds. And besides you're not worth it."

Miss Twilley bridled briefly and then nodded. "That's fair enough I
suppose. And there's one more thing. I want to be happy."

"I can do nothing about that. You make or lose your own happiness. I
can provide you such tangible things as a healthy body, beauty and
money, but what you do with them is entirely your own affair. No man or
Devi can guarantee happiness." He paused and looked thoughtfully at a
point above Miss Twilley's head. "I could, perhaps, provide you with
a talent such as singing or manual dexterity--and even make sufficient
adjustments in your inhibitions so you could employ your skill. But
that is all. Not even I can play Eblis."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Twilley's eyes glittered. If he could only do what he said it
would be worth any payment he demanded. She had never been pretty. As
a child she had been bony, ungainly, awkward and ugly. As an adult she
had only lost the awkwardness. Boys had never liked her. Men avoided
her. And she wanted desperately to be admired. And, of course, she was
about to die. That alone would be reason enough. She was appalled at
the thought of dying. At thirty-eight she was too young. Perhaps thirty
or forty years from now the prospect wouldn't be so terrifying, but
not now--not when she hadn't lived at all. Life had suddenly become
very precious, and its immediate extinction appalled her. She wasn't,
she reflected wryly, the stuff from which heroes or martyrs were made,
and ten years were a lot more than six months. As far as repayment was
concerned it was a long way off, and Hel was probably not much worse
than Ellenburg.

"In my opinion Hel's infinitely better," Lyf interjected.

"You're prejudiced," Miss Twilley said absently,--"now if she had
a figure like--hmm--say one of those movie actresses, and a face
like--hmmm--and money to go with them--hmm--it just might be worth
the price. Of course, it might not. It could be something like a salt
mine--or--"

"It's nothing at all like a salt mine," Lyf said. "The hours are
reasonable and there's plenty of free time outdoors if you want it.
The food isn't the Cafe Ritz, but it's nourishing, and the life is
healthful. After all we Devi aren't savages."

"I wonder," she said thoughtfully--"now if I could--hmm--say a gold
lamé sheath dress--ah!--and perhaps in a bikini--"

"Women!" Lyf sighed and gave up. Why should he bother about listing the
disadvantage. She hadn't been listening to the advantages.

"What are you stopping for?" Miss Twilley demanded. "I'm listening."

"There are a few other things such as free medical care, splendid
recreation facilities, and conducted tours of Hel."

"And the disadvantages?"

"Very few. There's no pay, of course, and you will be required to
devote a certain amount of time to my service. On the whole, employment
on Hel isn't much different than here except that it's a bit more
enlightened."

"Like slavery?" Miss Twilley smiled unpleasantly. "You're not dealing
with a fool."

"The concept of freedom is a relative thing," Lyf said. "And who
among us, either Devi or human, is truly free. And what is the
essential difference between being a slave to society and a slave to
an individual? We Devi don't have such a high regard for physical
liberty--"

"Obviously."

"But as long as you do your work, there's no interference with your
outside activities. You can think and read as you please. We supply our
help with a very complete library--and keep it up to date."

"Is that so?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lyf paled to a dull pink. "I wish you'd stop mentally dredging those
old lies about fire and brimstone. They're embarrassing. It's been
quite a few thousand years since a Devi has derived any satisfaction
from sadism. We've removed that particular trait from our race. You
won't be overworked or cruelly treated. And you won't be beaten or
subjected to physical torture. Since I have no knowledge of what you
might consider mental torture, I couldn't say whether there would be
any or not. I think not, since no other human has complained of being
mentally misused, but I can't tell."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Why can't you? You can read my mind."

"Only your thoughts, not your emotions or attitudes."

Miss Twilley shrugged. "It sounds fair enough, but twenty or thirty
years for ten is a high price."

"You fail to consider the costs involved. Your physical rehabilitation
will be expensive and your financial even more so. I'll have to employ
the Time Study Enclave to predict a financial plan for you, and
chronography isn't cheap."

"Why can't you just give me the money?"

Lyf shrugged. "I don't have it--and I couldn't supply you with gold.
It would be suspicious and we try to avoid attracting attention to our
clients or ourselves. Humans have some rather messy ways of abrogating
a fellow human's contract. So you acquire your wealth within the
framework of your society--through the stock market in your case."

"Oh--I see."

"Your money is enough to start you off. I'll show you how to make it
multiply."

"And if I cheat you?" Miss Twilley asked.

"You won't, I'm not utterly naive. There is a security clause in the
contract which must be fulfilled."

"And what is that?"

"I put my mark on you. That makes you a permanent sixth order focus I
can contact at any time."

"That gives you quite an advantage."

"Have you ever read any contracts on your own world? I'm not asking
for a thing more than your grantors do. In fact, not as much. Read a
mortgage sometime if you don't believe me." Lyf eyed her with mild
reproof. "Think," he said. "When--even in your perverted mythology--has
one of my race failed to live up to his end of an agreement? Who has
done the cheating? Who attempts to break contracts? Your whole history
is filled with specious promises, broken words, and outright falsehood.
Just why do you think we had to make contracts in the first place?
Because you humans cheated at every opportunity. And you still do.
That's why we must have guarantees. We go to all the expense, take all
the risk and then run the added risk of being double crossed. That's
too much."

"But our souls are beyond price."

"I've already told you that I care nothing for your soul. It's useless
to me." He frowned. "We have had to fight that canard for centuries.
We Devi are practical folk, not starry-eyed idealists. We deal in real
property, not in intangibles. Now stop quibbling and make up your mind.
You've heard the concessions. After all, there is a limit to altruism.
Now if you don't want to deal, say so and I'll leave. It will be no
skin off my tail if you don't accept." Lyf half turned toward the T.V.
set.

"I haven't said I wouldn't," Miss Twilley said.

"Nor have you said you would. Now speak up. My time's valuable."

"Oh--very well," Miss Twilley said sulkily. "I accept."

Lyf smiled, reached under his cloak and produced a long sheet of paper
covered with writing. "You're a hard bargainer, Miss Twilley," he said.
"You extracted every condition you could possibly get on a deal of
this kind. My congratulations. This is a personal contract I had drawn
up. It's in English so you can understand it. All you do is sign both
copies. In transactions like this no witnesses are necessary."

"You don't mind if I read it first?" Miss Twilley said. "Not that I
don't trust you--but this is business."

"Not at all," Lyf said "and please note the escape clause which allows
you a peremptory withdraw if you are not satisfied with the basic
services."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Twilley eyed the paper, skipping over the legal jargon, but
carefully reading the specific provisions. It was deceptively simple
and completely binding. But it didn't vary from Lyf's proposals. She
would have ten years of health, wealth and beauty, in return for which
she would surrender her body to Lyf, mardak of Gnoth, to employ as he
saw fit--within certain limits provided by the exceptions. She sighed.
It was fair enough, she supposed. There were a few exceptions like the
suicide clause that allowed Lyf to take immediate possession if she
tried to kill herself, and the war clause which permitted him to remove
her to a safe place for the duration of the conflict. She shrugged.
There didn't seem to be anything wrong with it except the tone. Somehow
it managed to convey the impression of a property rather than a
personal transaction.

"It's always best to keep these things impersonal," the Devi said. "You
sign on the bottom line underneath my cartouche."

Miss Twilley signed.

"And now," Lyf said briskly "there are a few formalities. Not that I
don't trust you, of course, but business is business. Will you please
disrobe?"

"Must I?"

Lyf nodded. "You must. I realize that this is embarrassing for you, but
it would be infinitely more embarrassing if I placed my mark upon you
while you were clothed."

Miss Twilley shivered a little as she reached for the zipper of her
skirt. But she had expected something like this.

Lyf looked at her critically. "You're worse than I thought," he said.
"However, your skeleton seems structurally sound and well proportioned.
Now please turn around."

Miss Twilley had hardly turned her back when a lance of numbing cold
struck her in the base of the spine. She jumped involuntarily as Lyf's
voice came to her ears.

"There--that does it." He walked past her and turned off the T.V. The
black hole winked out, leaving a shattered picture tube where it had
been. "Now that you're a sixth order focal point we can dispense with
this monstrosity," he said. "The automatics on Hel will generate a new
gateway shortly."

"Now what?" Miss Twilley asked. She wasn't sure that she liked the idea
of being a sixth order focus.

"The mark leaves a small red lesion," Lyf said, "but it won't bother
you. However, I should warn you not to attempt to have it removed. That
could be quite painful and perhaps fatal." He moved in front of her.
"I expect that we'd better start therapy right away. That tumor isn't
going to be easy to remove." His eyes were level with her own, twin
pools of clear bottomless green with the darker spots of his pupils
sharply demarcated from the surrounding iris. With mild surprise she
realized that they were oval rather than round, and that their ellipses
were growing--and encompassing her in their inner darkness.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lyf eyed her solicitously from a chair next to her bed. There was a
faint proprietory glint in his eyes but his voice was as soft as ever.
"It's all done Enid," he said. "How do you like it?"

Miss Twilley didn't like the use of her first name. It sounded entirely
too familiar, but she supposed that there was little she could do
about it. After all he did have certain rights, even though their full
exercise was some years hence. She stirred sleepily. She was in her own
bedroom and the bed that she had slept in these past eighteen years
was familiar and comforting. Except for the Devi sitting beside her
everything was normal down to the last fold of the flannel nightgown
that covered her.

She felt oddly alive, and somehow different. There was a fullness to
her body and a heaviness to her chest. She looked down and gasped with
surprise and pleasure at the jutting rise of the nightgown. She _had_
changed!

"That was the biggest part of the specifications," Lyf said with the
faintest hint of amusement in his voice. "Your mental patterns were
extraordinarily precise about some things. About others I had to use my
own judgment. I hope the overall effect meets with your approval."

Miss Twilley felt as excited as an adolescent on her first date.
She slipped out of bed and padded on bare feet over to the vanity
in the corner. Eagerly she eyed herself in the big mirror. Even in
the nightgown she looked good. Her face was still her own but it had
been subtly changed, the features smoothed and rearranged. Her pale
blue eyes were now a smoky gray, and her plain mouse-brown hair had
reddish glints in it and was much thicker than before. It was a very
satisfactory face, smooth and beautiful, and years younger. Why--she
looked barely twenty five!

With a quick movement she bent, grasped the hem of her gown, and pulled
it over her head.

And gasped!

She had never dreamed of looking like this, even in her wildest flights
of fancy!

"Like it?" Lyf asked from his seat in the corner.

"_Like_ it!" she chortled. "I _adore_ it! How on Earth did you do it?
You've not only made me beautiful, you've made me young!"

"I didn't do it on Earth," Lyf admitted. "I took you to Hel where
there's some decent equipment. It wasn't much," he added vaguely,
"merely the application of some rather simple cellular biology--mostly
a rearrangement of DNA molecules and a bit of sarcoplasty. Actually it
wasn't too difficult. The removal of your tumor was much harder. You'll
find that two weeks have gone from your life, but they've been well
spent."

"I should say they have!" Miss Twilley said as she pirouetted slowly
before the glass. Her brows knit in a tiny frown as she saw her only
blemish, a bright red spot at the base of her spine.

"The mark can't be helped," Lyf said, "but it doesn't detract at all.
And it won't show even in a bikini."

"Forty, twenty-four, thirty-six." Miss Twilley breathed. "Lyf--I could
kiss you!"

"I'd rather you wouldn't," Lyf said. "There is, after all, a certain
species incompatibility between yours and mine. Incidentally, you have
perfect health. You'll never know a sick day for the rest of your life
which should be quite long. And I gave you a fine singing voice, and a
mental attitude that will let you use it."

"Thank you," Miss Twilley murmured as she stared at her reflection.

"I've left instructions for your financial operations on your dresser.
Follow them and you'll be financially independent. I think that does
it. Everything is satisfactory, I trust."

"Completely," Miss Twilley breathed, never removing her eyes from the
mirror.

"Then I shall be leaving."

       *       *       *       *       *

Miss Twilley drew in a deep breath and observed the results with utter
fascination. "Don't you think I'm beautiful?" she asked.

Lyf smiled. "Different worlds, different standards," he said. "Beautiful
isn't quite the word I would use."

"What word _would_ you use?"

"Useful," Lyf said.

"Useful? Hmm. What do you mean?"

"It should be obvious," Lyf said. "But I suppose it isn't. You humans
are a strange lot. You assume. You don't reason. And it always shocks
you to find that your assumptions are wrong."

Miss Twilley looked at him with wide eyes. A cold chill ran down her
spine and poked tingling rootlets of ice into her viscera. "What have I
assumed?"

"Do I have to answer that?"

Miss Twilley blushed. The effect was far more startling this time.

Lyf smiled with an air that would have been infuriating in a human
but was somehow appropriate for a Devi. Miss Twilley sighed. At least
_that_ worry was removed.

"Perhaps I should give you a short synopsis of Devian society," Lyf
said. "It's not like yours. Millennia ago our culture and technology
evolved to the point where individual needs could be satisfied
effortlessly. As a result we were compelled to consider group desires.
Modern society on Hel is composed of enclaves with a community of
interest plus certain ancillary groups that support them. The task of
satisfying the desires of an enclave is infinitely more complex than
satisfying an individual, which gives our civilization the necessary
stimulus to progress.

"One of the reasons we deal with your world is to provide us with
things impractical to produce upon our own. Another reason is
amusement. If only you humans were not so savage we could perhaps
arrange tours of Earth to observe you in your native haunts."

"Is that why--" Miss Twilley began.

He shook his head. "No--the importation of humans for ethnological
studies has long since become a matter of interest only to highly
specialized enclaves. _That_ subject has been exhausted for popular
satisfaction. We have tried to import other species, but they do
not thrive on Hel, and it takes a great deal of trouble merely to
keep them alive. However, your race adapts so readily that even your
cultural variations disappear in a few decades.

"It was this early importation and your ability to survive that has
placed your race in such demand. It is unfortunate, perhaps, that your
species cannot reproduce on our world, but the inhibitors we use to
regulate our numbers also affect yours. Naturally, we can't risk a
population explosion merely to reproduce your race. So we obtain more
of you when necessary."

"Why?"

"Consider for a moment what might be valuable in a civilization that
has no basic needs."

"Luxuries?"

"Precisely. As an ancillary system operator, I supply a luxury item
to my fellow citizens. One that cannot be readily produced by our
techniques. I said I was a mardak, but you never asked what it meant.
You assumed it was a title. It is, but it's professional, not social.
There are no classes on Hel, merely occupations."

"All right," Miss Twilley said reluctantly, "What is a mardak?"

"The closest analogy in your society," Lyf said, "is a dairyman."


                                THE END






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR SERVICE RENDERED ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


