The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hang head, vandal
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hang head, vandal

Author: Mark Clifton

Illustrator: Virgil Finlay

Release date: November 21, 2023 [eBook #72192]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HANG HEAD, VANDAL ***





                          HANG HEAD, VANDAL!

                            By MARK CLIFTON

                         Illustrated by FINLAY

           _Arrogantly, they set out to destroy a planet for
            the good of Man--Man who is stuffed with straw
             where his heart and mind and soul should be._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                      Amazing Stories April 1962
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


On our abandoned Martian landing field there hangs a man's discarded
spacesuit, suspended from the desensitized prongs of a Come-to-me
tower. It is stuffed with straw filched, no doubt, from packing
cases which brought out so many more delicate, sensitive, precision
instruments than we take back.

None knows which of our departing crew hanged the spacesuit there, nor
exactly what he meant in the act. A scarecrow to frighten all others
away?

More likely a mere Kilroy-was-here symbol; defacing initials
irresistably carved in a priceless, ancient work of art, saying, "I am
too shoddy a specimen to create anything of worth, but I can deface.
And this proves I, too, have been."

Or was it symbolic suicide; a sense of guilt so overpowering that man
has hanged himself in effigy upon the scene of his crime?

Captain Leyton saw it there on the morning of final departure; saw it,
and felt a sudden flush of his usual stern discipline surge within him;
all but formed the harsh command to take that thing down at once: Find
the one who hanged it there: Bring him to me!

The anger--the command. Died together. Unspoken.

Something in the pose of the stuffed effigy hanging there must have got
down through to the diminishing person inside the ever thickening rind
of a commander. The forlorn sadness, the dejection; and yes, he too
must have felt the shame, the guilt, which overwhelmed us all.

Whether the helmet had fallen forward of its own weight because the
vandal had been careless in stuffing it with too little straw to hold
its head erect--vandals being characteristically futile even in their
vandalism--or whether, instead of supposed vandal, this was the talent
of a consummate artist moulding steel and rubber, plastic and straw
into an expression of how we all felt: no matter, the result was there.

The Captain did not command the effigy be taken down. No others
offered, nor asked if that might be his wish--not even the ubiquitous
Ensign perpetually bucking for approval.

So on an abandoned Martian landing field there hangs a discarded
spacesuit--the image of man stuffed with straw; with straw where heart,
and mind, and soul was intended to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

At the time it seemed a most logical solution to an almost impossible
problem.

Dr. VanDam summed it up in his memorable speech before the United
Nations. If he were visually conscious of the vault of face blurs in
the hushed assembly, this lesser sight did not obscure his stronger
vision of the greater vaulted mass of shining stars in black of space.

He may not even have been conscious of political realities which ever
obscure man's dreams. First, what he said would be weighed by each
delegate in terms of personal advantage to be gained for his own
status. Second, his words must be weighed again in terms of national
interest. Third, what advantage could be squeezed out for their
racial-religious-color bloc? At the fourth level of consideration,
what advantage to the small nation bloc over the large; or how would
it enhance the special privileges of the large over the small? Down at
the fifth level, could it preserve the status quo, changing nothing
so that those in power could remain in power, while, at the same
time, giving the illusion of progress to confound the ever clamoring
liberals? At the deep sixth level, if one ever got down that far, one
might give a small fleeting thought to what might be good for mankind.

If Dr. VanDam even knew that such political realities must ever take
precedence over the dreams of science, he gave no sign of it. It was
as if all his thought was upon the glory of the stars and the dream of
man reaching out to them. It was with the goal of reaching the stars in
mind that he spoke.

"We must sum up the problem," he was saying. "It is simply this. There
is a limit to how far we can theorize in science without testing those
theories to see if they will work. Sooner or later the theorist must
submit himself into the hands of the engineer whose acid test of worth
is simply this: 'Does it work?'

"We have always known that the Roman candles we are using for our timid
little space flights can take us only to the nearest planets; for
there is that inexorable ratio of time to initial thrust; that unless
thrust continues and continues the Mayfly lifetime of man will expire
many times over before we could reach the nearest star. Nor will our
limited resources fuel ion engines, and we must learn how to replenish
with space dust gathered along the way.

"To have continuous velocity we must have continuous nuclear power. To
have continuous nuclear power, we must have more nuclear tests. Now we
believe we know how to take not special ores but ordinary matter, of
any kind, and convert it into nuclear power. We believe we can control
this. We have this in theory. But the engineer has not tested it with
his question, 'Does it work?'

"We cannot make these tests on Earth. For what if it does not work?
We dare not use the Moon. Its lighter gravity makes it too valuable a
piece of real estate in terms of future star journeys. It will be our
busy landing stage; we dare not contaminate it nor risk destroying it.

"We have reached stalemate. On Earth and Moon we can go on no farther
without testing. On Earth and Moon we dare not test. Some other testing
area must be found.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Our explorers have brought us conclusive proof that Mars is a dead
world. A useless world in terms of life. Useless, too, as a source of
minerals, for our little Roman candles can carry no commercial payload.
A useless world for colonization, with air too tenuous for human lungs
and water too scarce for growing food. Humans must be housed in sealed
chambers, or constantly wear spacesuits. From all practical points of
view, a worthless world.

"But invaluable to science. For there, without destroying anything of
value to man, we can put our theories to test. We believe we can start
a nuclear reaction in ordinary rock and dirt, and keep it under control
to produce a continuous flow of power. We believe we can keep it from
running wild out of control.

"If the innumerable tests we must run do contaminate the planet, or
even destroy it slowly, our gain in knowledge will be greater than the
loss of this worthless real estate."

There was a stir in the Assembly; something between a gasp of horror
and admiration at the audacity of man's sacrificing a whole planet to
his knowledge. They had not known we were so far along the way.

And then, on second thought, a settling back in satisfaction. It seemed
a simple solution to an impossible problem. To take not only VanDam's
tests away from Earth, but all nuclear testing of every kind! To quell
the fears and still the clamoring of the humanists who would rather
see man stagnate in ignorance than risk the future to learn. At every
level of political reality this might turn to advantage. If there were
any who still thought in such terms, it might even be good for mankind
generally!

"I am not mystic minded," VanDam continued when the rustle and murmur
had diminished. "But the convenience of this particular planet, located
precisely where it is, far enough away that we must have made great
progress in science to reach it, and close enough to be ready when
we need it for further progress; this seems almost mystical in its
coincidence."

(That for the ones who would have to go through the usual motions of
obtaining Higher Power approval for doing what they fully intended
doing all along.)

"My question: Shall the nations of Earth agree upon our use of this so
convenient, and otherwise worthless, ready-at-hand stage placed right
where we need it--waiting for us down through all the ages until we
should be ready to make use of it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Their ultimate response was favorable.

Dr. VanDam did not mention, and being only politicians unable to see
beyond the next vote or appointment they did not ask:

True, we do have a theory of how to start and continue the slow burn
nuclear conversion of ordinary rock and dirt to energy. What we do not
have, as yet, is a way to stop it.

We _think_ that eventually future man will probably find a way to stop
the process. We _think_ slow burn will not speed up and run out of
control to consume an entire planet before we have found a way to stop
it. We _think_ that future science may even find a way to decontaminate
the planet. We _hope_ these things.

But we _know_ that the science of nucleonics will be stillborn and
stunted to grow no farther unless we go on testing. We convince
ourselves that even if an entire planet is consumed, it is a worthless
planet anyway, and will be worth it.

Yet there was the usual small minority who questioned our right to
destroy one of the planets of the solar system. There is always such a
minority, and as always, the rest of the world, intent on turning what
it intended to do anyway into the Right-Thing-To-Do, was able to shout
them down.

Anyway, the consequences were for future man to face. Or so we thought.

I say we, because I was one of the members of Project Slow-Burn. Not
that I'm the hero. There wasn't any hero. Mistaken or not, it was
conceived this wasn't one of those television spectaculars cooked up to
convert science into public emotionalism. There was no country-wide
search for special photogenic hero-types to front the project.

The reporters, true to their writing tradition of trying to reduce
even the most profound scientific achievement to the lowest common
denominator of sloppy sentimentalism or avid sensationalism, tried to
heroize Dr. VanDam as head of the science side of the project. But he
wasn't having any.

"Don't you think, gentlemen," he answered them with acid scorn, "It
is about time the public grew up enough to support the search for
knowledge because we need it, rather than because they'd like to go to
bed with some handsome, brainless kook you've built up into a hero?"

This response was not likely to further the cause of journalism.

They tried to lionize Captain Leyton, as head of the transport side of
it; but his remarks were even more unprintable.

They never got down far enough through the echelons of status to reach
me. I was Chief of Communications, which is just another way of saying
I was a television repair man with headaches. Not that it would have
done them any good.

There isn't one thing about me that fits the sentimental notions of
what a hero should be. I'm not even a colorful character. If I'm
expert in my job it's only because I learned early what any lazy man
with an ounce of brains also learns--that life goes easier for the
expert than for the ignorant. Which is not exactly the hero attitude
the public likes to hear, but true all the same.

I did have an advantage which qualifies me to tell this tale.

       *       *       *       *       *

Supervision, nowadays, sits on its duff in an office surrounded by
television monitors showing them every phase of their responsibilities,
and punches buttons when some guy tries to goof-off or starts lousing
up the operation.

Somebody has to maintain the system and check the same monitors. I saw
everything of importance that happened.

That's the only way I come into the yarn at all. I didn't start out a
hero type. I didn't turn into one. I just watched what happened; and I
got sick at my stomach along with everybody else. And now I slink away,
sick and ashamed, and not understanding even that, along with the rest.
Not heroes--no--none of us.

From the first this was intended and conducted as a genuine scientific
project, a group effort, with each man's ego subdued and blended in to
serve the needs of the whole. No special heroes emerging to show up the
rest of the dopes. None of the usual stuff of romantic fiction was
supposed to happen--those unusual dangers, horrible accidents, sudden
frightful emergencies so dear to the little sadistic hearts of readers
and viewers.

So far as I know, nobody beat up anybody with their fists, nor gunned
them down; which is the usual, almost the only, fictional way yet found
among the humanists for coping with life problems.

We assembled the mastership on the Moon base from parts which were
Roman candled up, a few pieces at a time, from too heavily gravitied
Earth.

The yelps of pain from taxpayers reached almost as high. It was one
thing to wash the hands of the vexing problem of nuclear testing by
wanting it shifted out to Mars. It was something else to pay for having
it.

Against the Moon's lighter gravity we eventually were space-borne with
no more than the usual fight between power thrust and inertia, both
physical and psychological.

Without touching that precious reserve of fuel which we hoped would
bring us back again, we were able to build up enough speed that it took
us only a month to reach Mars. No point in showing, because nobody
would care, how the two dozen of us were cramped in the tiny spaces
left by the equipment and instruments we had to carry.

Construction and maintenance had done their job properly, and, for
once, inspection had actually done its job, too. We were able to
reverse properly at the right time, and soft cushion powered our way
down into a Martian plain eastward of a low range of hills.

Surely everybody has watched the documentaries long enough to have some
idea about the incredibly hostile surface of Mars; the too thin air,
which lets some stars shine through even in daytime; the waterless
desert; the extremes of temperature; the desolation....

Ah, the desolation! The terrifying desolation!

       *       *       *       *       *

Moon surface is bad enough; but at least there is the great ball of
Earth, seeming so near in that airless world that one has the illusion
of being able to reach out and almost touch it, touch home, know home
is still there, imagine he can almost see it.

"See that little tip of land there on the east coast of the North
American continent? That's where I live!"

"Yeah," somebody answers. "And who is that guy walking through your
front door without knocking while you're away?"

Sometimes it seems that close.

On Mars, Earth is just another bright spot in the black night sky;
so far away that the first reaction is one of terrible despair, the
overpowering conviction that in all that vast hostility a man will
nevermore see home; nor know again the balmy twilight of soft, moist
summer; nor feel the arms of love.

Explorers had not lied. Nothing, anywhere, could be more worthless to
man than the planet Mars. Worthless, except for the unique purpose
which had brought us there.

We dug in beneath the surface.

Now surely, again, everyone has seen enough of the documentaries
that it is unnecessary to show us digging out our living quarters
and laboratories beneath that merciless plain. We used the displaced
powdered rock to form a crude cement, not long lasting but adequate for
the time we would be there. With it, we surfaced over our living area.
This was not so much to provide a landing field, since most of our
journeying would be in individual jet powered spacesuits; but to help
insure against any leakage of air if our inner seals cracked.

To help seal out the killing radiation we intended to let loose--that,
too.

We erected Come-to-me towers at each elevator which would lower
spacesuited men to lower levels where they could go through locks to
reach their quarters. One Come-to-me tower for each half dozen men,
tuned to the power source of their suits, to bring each man safely
back, as truly as a homing pigeon, to guarantee against becoming lost
on that hostile planet; and, in emergency, should one arise, to see
that no panic mob ganged up at one lock and died waiting there for
entrance to safety while other locks remained idle--the human way of
doing things under stress.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had to finish all that in the first few weeks before any nuclear
tests could be started. Anybody whose notions of science are derived
from white-frocked actors in television commercials hasn't the vaguest
idea of how much back breaking physical work at the common labor level
a genuine scientist has to do.

There was some emotional relief once we had dug in and sealed out the
awful desolation of an uncaring universe. (This is the hardest part of
reconciling oneself to the science attitude. More comforting to believe
even that the universe is hostile than to admit that it simply doesn't
care about man, one way or another.) In our sealed quarters we might
briefly imagine ourselves working in an air conditioned laboratory back
home.

It helped. It certainly helped.

Not that I seemed to find time for more than exhausted sleeping there.
To see what would be going on at the various field sites where tests
were to be run meant the cameras had to be installed at those spots.
In spite of the purported rigid tests for expedition personnel, my two
assistants must have been somebody's nephews. Somehow each installation
seemed to require I be there.

Be there, and usually without some little piece of equipment which
would have helped so much, but which had been deleted from the lists we
submitted by clerks who were more concerned with making a big showing
on how much weight they could eliminate than in helping us.

Somehow we managed.

But I have made a little list of guys I'm going to ferret out and poke
in the nose once I get back to Earth. Maybe those Hollywood producers
who think the only way to solve a problem is to beat up somebody or gun
him down have something, after all. Right on top of that list, in big
bold letters, is the spacesuit designer who thinks a man can handle the
incredibly fine parts of miniaturized electronic equipment with those
crude instruments they give us to screw into the arm ends of spacesuits.

Somehow we managed. Somehow, out of chaos, order came. Somehow tests
got made. Sometimes the theories worked; sometimes, more often, there
was only the human sigh, the gulp, the shrug, and back to the drawing
board.

Big surprise at the end of the first three months. A supply ship
landed. Mostly food and some champagne, yet! Stuff the folks back home
thought they'd like to have if they were out there. Even some pin-up
pictures, as if we weren't already having enough trouble without being
reminded. But none of the equipment we'd radioed for in case the
taxpayers could forego a drink and a cigarette apiece to raise money
for sending it. The public couldn't understand our need for equipment,
so they didn't send any. Miracles aren't supposed to need any equipment
or effort; they just come into being because people want them.

The packages of home baked cookies were welcome enough after our
diet of hydroponic algae, but I'd still rather have had a handful of
miniature transistors.

Some of the guys said they'd have been willing to substitute their
cookies for an equal weight of big, buxom blonde; but that's something
the cookie bakers probably preferred not to think about.

The little three man crew of the supply ship, as they were taking
off for their return journey, promised they'd tell 'em what we really
wanted when they got back, but I doubt the message ever got broadcast
over the home and family television sets. Anyway, scientists are
supposed to be cold, unfeeling, inhuman creatures who wander around
looking noble, wise, and above it all.

In the beginning I'd thought that once I got the heavy work of
installation completed, I could do a little wandering around looking
wise and noble, myself. No such luck. I'd no more than get set up to
show one experiment than it was over; and I'd have to dismantle, move,
and set up for another. We'd thought the lighter gravity of Mars,
thirty-eight percent, would make the labor easy. But somehow there was
still lifting, tugging, pulling, hauling, cursing.

But then, nobody wants to hear how the scientist has to work to get his
miracle. The whole essence is the illusion that miracles can be had
without work, that all one needs is to wish.

All right. So we'll get to the miracle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now we were finally ready to get down to the real test, the main reason
for our coming out to Mars--Project Slow-Burn.

VanDam chose a little pocket at the center of that little cluster of
hills to our West--that little cluster of hills everybody has seen in
the pictures radioed back to Earth.

We didn't know it at the time, but that little cluster of hills was
causing quite an uproar among archeologists back home. No archeologist
had been included in the expedition, and now they were beating their
breasts that from the pictures those hills looked mighty artificial
to them. There was too much of a hint that the hills might once have
been pyramids, they said; incredibly ancient, perhaps weathered down
eons ago when the planet was younger, before it had lost so much of its
atmosphere, but maybe still containing something beneath them.

We didn't hear the uproar, of course. Administration deemed it
unnecessary for us to bother our pretty little heads about such
nonsense. In fact the uproar never got outside the academic cloister to
reach the public at all. Administration should have listened. But then,
when does man listen to what might interfere with his plans to spoil
something?

We got all set to go in that little pocket at the center of the
hills. The spot was ideal for us because the hill elevations gave us
opportunity to place our cameras on their top to focus down into the
crater we hoped would appear.

A whole ring of cameras was demanded; as if the physicists shared too
much of the public's attitude, and all I needed to produce enough
equipment was to wish for it. But by stripping the stuff from virtually
every other project, I managed to balance the demands of the Slow-Burn
crew against the outraged screams of the side issue scientists.

VanDam's theories worked.

At first it took the instruments to detect that there was any activity;
but gradually, even crude human eyes could see there was a hole
beginning to appear, deepen and spread--progressively.

It was out of my line, but the general idea seemed to be that only one
molecular layer at a time was affected, and that it, in turn, activated
the next beneath and to the side while its own electrons and protons
gave up their final energy.

The experiment did not work perfectly. The process should have been
complete. There should have been no by-product of smoke and fire, no
sign to human eyes of anything happening except a slowly deepening and
spreading hole in the ground.

Instead there was some waste of improperly consumed molecules,
resulting in an increasingly heavy, fire-laced smoke which arose
sluggishly in the thin air, borne aloft only by its heat, funneling
briefly while it gave up that heat; then to settle down and contaminate
everything it touched.

To compound my troubles, of course.

       *       *       *       *       *

The physicists were griping their guts out because I didn't have the
proper infra-red equipment to penetrate the smoke; and somehow I wasn't
smart enough to snap my fingers and--abracadabra--produce. Those damned
cookie packages instead of equipment! Those damned clerks who had
decided what we wouldn't need. My little list was getting longer.

Still, I guess I was able to get a feeble little snap from my fingers.
I did manage to convert some stuff, never intended for that purpose,
into infra-red penetration. We managed to see down into that smoke- and
fire-filled crater.

To see enough.

It was the middle of a morning (somebody who still cared claimed it
would be a Tuesday back home) some three basic weeks after beginning
the experiment. The hole was now some thirty feet across and equally
deep, growing faster than VanDam's figures predicted it should, but
still not running wild and out of control. Even if it had been, we
couldn't have stopped it. We didn't know how.

I was trying to work out a little cleaner fix on the South wall of the
crater when that wall disappeared like the side of a soap bubble. My
focus was sharp enough to see.

To see down and into that huge, vaulted room. To see the living
Martians in that room shrivel, blacken, writhe and die. To see some
priceless, alien works of art writhe and blacken and curl; some burst
into flame; some shatter unto dust.

That was when the scientists, sitting there watching their monitors
with horror-stricken eyes, felt jubilation replaced with terrible guilt.

I, too. For naturally I was watching the master monitors to see that
the equipment kept working. I saw it all.

I saw those miniature people, yes people, whole and beautiful, in one
brief instant blacken, writhe and die.

Out of the billions of gross people on Earth, once in a generation
a tiny midget is born and matures to adult of such perfection in
proportion and surpassing beauty that the huge, coarse, normal person
can only stare and marvel--and remember the delicate perfection of that
miniature being, with nostalgic yearning for the rest of his life.

From such, perhaps, comes the legends common to all peoples in all
ages, of the fairies. Or, eons ago, was there traffic between Earth
and Mars? Or even original colonization from Mars to Earth, finally
mutating into giants? They were people, miniatures of ourselves.

I saw them there. Perhaps not more than a dozen in that room. But
in other rooms? Perhaps in a lacework of underground rooms? A whole
civilization which, like ourselves on Mars, had gone underground,
sealed themselves in against the thinning atmosphere, the dying planet?

And we had begun the atomic destruction of their planet. We had begun
it. We could not stop it. The corrosion keeps growing, spreading.

I saw them die. Somehow I felt their pain.

But I did not die of it.

I carry it with me. I shall always carry it with me.

       *       *       *       *       *

That's all there is.

In years to come people on Earth, people who did not see what we saw,
did not feel the pain and guilt we felt, will wonder at our behavior
following that.

Oh there is much to wonder. If there is a civilization, where does
their food come from? If they are able to convert rock to food, why
are they not able to stop the atomic destruction of their planet we
have started? If they are able to so fill us with their own grief for
what we have done that we can think of nothing but to slink away, like
whipped curs caught in vandalism; why didn't they do this before we
started the fire we cannot stop?

Oh, there is so much unanswered. People will wonder that we simply
abandoned most of our equipment, the very project itself; that for a
sick hour we watched, then, with one accord, without anybody making the
decision, we began to withdraw and start for home.

Like small boys, thinking only to vandalize a schoolhouse in their
savage glee, discovering it is a shrine.

Or, perhaps in time, we can rationalize it all away. Perhaps so soon as
during that long journey back.

It wasn't our fault, we shall begin to say. They were as much to blame
as we. Sure they were!

More to blame! They were more to blame than we!

Why didn't they come out of their holes and fight us? With their
fists if they didn't have any guns? _Any_ red-bloodied--er,
red-blooded--Amuri--well, whatever they are--ought to have enough guts
to come out and fight, to defend home, flag and mother!

We'll probably get around to that. It's the normal attitude to take
after vandalism. It's the human way.

But as of now, our only thought is to slink away.

       *       *       *       *       *

On our abandoned Martian landing field there hangs a man's discarded
spacesuit, suspended from the desensitized prongs of a Come-to-me
tower. It is stuffed with straw filched, no doubt, from packing
cases which brought out so many more delicate, sensitive, precision
instruments than we take back.

Although we have not been entirely irresponsible in our head-long
flight back home.

We do bring back some of what we took out; the more valuable of the
instruments. We have been most selective in this.

The only coarse, insensitive, unfinished instrument we bring back--is
man.


                                THE END





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HANG HEAD, VANDAL ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


